Developer docs (#11)
exercism/rescript: README.md

Reviewer: One sentence per line per https://github.com/exercism/docs/blob/main/building/markdown/markdown.md#one-sentence-per-line

Open up two terminals. By running the commands below, files will compile on save and re-run the test suite.

```shell
# Terminal 1
npm run res:start

# Terminal 2
npm run test
```

## Coding Style

Use `PascalCase.res` for Reason implementation file names.
A ReScript interface file (`.resi`) should be included with every exercise to help the user get started.

Run `make format` on your code before pushing.

If you are using VS Code, install the official [ReScript VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=chenglou92.rescript-vscode) for syntax highlighting and code formatting.

## Adding Exercises

Documentation on contributing to Exercism can be found [here][exercism-contributing-docs-link].

New practice exercises can be added via:

```shell
bin/add-practice-exercise <exercise-slug>

# Optionally, you can also specify the exercise's difficulty (via `-d`) and/or author's GitHub username (via `-a`):
bin/add-practice-exercise -a foobar -d 3 <exercise-slug>
```

Now complete the following steps:

- `config.json` - ensure that the new exercise data is correctly placed in order of difficulty and then alphabetically within that difficulty rating.

> - implement exercise test cases, detailed in the [testing](#testing) section below.

Reviewer: Can we remove the old version? Generally, it's old for a reason, and it's hard for me to skim through the file since I need to track regularly whether I'm in a commented-out section or not. The old versions if we need them are in the commit history.

> - implement exercise test cases, detailed in the [testing](#testing) section below.

Author: yes i will do that this evening, and start working on the suggestions

Exercism exercises in ReScript.

## Installation

> Track exercises target [Rescript] 12.2.0 using the [ReScript Test][ReScriptTest] testing framework on [Node.js] 22+. If you're contributing to the track, you will also need [make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Track exercises target [ReScript] 12.2.0 using the [ReScript Test][ReScriptTest] testing framework on [Node.js] 22+. If you're contributing to the track, you will also need [make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/).
```

### Setting up the development environment

Run the following commands from inside the project root directory to install the required tools:

```shell
npm install
git submodule update --init --recursive # add/update a local copy of the problem-specification submodule
```

To automate the creation of practice exercise tests, our track tooling consumes data from the the [problem specifications][exercism-problem-specifications-link] submodule. Because these specifications serve as the canonical source for all Exercism tracks, any upstream updates ensure our test cases remain consistent with the global exercise standard.

If you have format on save enabled for JSON files, it is recommended to disable this feature. Alternatively save JSON files with `Ctrl+K s` to save without applying formatting rules.

> ### Running the development environment

Reviewer: This is subordinate to installing the development environment, but this is a separate step. We'd only set up the environment once, but we'd run it multiple times potentially so this should be under a separate header than installation

Open up two terminals. By running the commands below, files will compile on save and re-run the test suite.

```shell
# Terminal 1
npm run res:start

# Terminal 2
npm run test
```

> ## Coding Style

Reviewer: Coding style comes pretty early so we're giving style guidance before the contributor knows what to do with this information. I'd put this towards the bottom of the page.

> Use `PascalCase.res` for Reason implementation file names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `PascalCase.res` for ReScript implementation file names.
```

Reviewer: Interface files get a link in the following sentence, but implementation files don't get one here. Would it be clear to contributors what we mean by implementation files?

A ReScript [interface file][rescript-interface-file-link] (`.resi`) should be included with every exercise to help the user get started.
For example:

```shell
# exercises/practice/<exercise-name>/.meta/Example.resi
let add: (int, int) => int
```

> Run `make format` on your code before pushing.

Reviewer: If we're keeping this in, we should add a sentence on what `make format` is doing so it's clear why it's part of the process.

> If you are using VS Code, install the official [ReScript VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=chenglou92.rescript-vscode) for syntax highlighting and code formatting. Unofficial plugins exist for JetBrains products.

Reviewer: We're primarily using reference links so embedding the URL on this line looks odd. We should be consistent.

Terminal based text editors often work with the [ReScript Language Server][rescript-language-server-link] installed. Refer to the documentation of your text editor / IDE for further instructions

> ## Contributing to Exercises

Reviewer: I think this section should come first to give potential contributors a soft landing and show how they might contribute to the track. The current order assumes they've already made the decision, but that might be too much all at once. Once we've introduced them to possible ways to contribute, that leads nicely into "okay, then how?" and the tooling instruction details.

> Contributing to the exercises in this track can involve: adding a new exercise, updating an existing one, or managing the test suite.

Reviewer: Managing a test suite sounds like it falls under updating an existing exercise. However, we should be clear that there are non-exercise contributions like for example track tooling or docs updates.

Documentation on contributing to Exercism can be found [here][exercism-contributing-docs-link].

### Adding a new exercise

To introduce a brand new practice exercise to the track, follow these steps:

- **Initialise the exercise:** Run the generator script to create the folder structure and boilerplate.

```shell
bin/add-practice-exercise <exercise-slug>

# Optionally, you can also specify the exercise's difficulty (via `-d`) and/or author's GitHub username (via `-a`):
bin/add-practice-exercise -a foobar -d 3 <exercise-slug>
```

> - **Register the exercise:** Open the root `config.json` file. Update the difficulty rating of the exercise, and then ensure that that exercise is correctly placed in order of difficulty and then alphabetically within that difiiculty rating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Register the exercise:** Open the root `config.json` file. Update the difficulty rating of the exercise, and then ensure that that exercise is correctly placed in order of difficulty and then alphabetically within that difficulty rating.
```

- **Create the stub:** In `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/src/`, modify the .res file to return `panic("'<function-name>' has not been implemented")`.

- **Define the interface:** Update the .resi (interface) file in `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/src/` and `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/` directories to include the function signatures. This provides students with the necessary type hints.

- **Generate test cases:** Follow the steps in the [Generating and managing tests](#generating-and-managing-tests) subsection below.

- **Provide an example solution:** In `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/`, implement a working solution in the .res file. This does not need to be an exemplar solution, but must pass all test cases.

### Generating and managing tests

We use a templating system to keep tests consistent with Exercism's canonical data found in the problem-specification git submodule.

Tests are written using [rescript-test](https://bloodyowl.github.io/rescript-test/). Follow these steps when writing tests:

> - **Filter canonical data:** Open `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/tests.toml`. If a specific canonical test case is not applicable to ReScript, add ignore = true below its description. E.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Filter canonical data:** Open `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/tests.toml`. If a specific canonical test case is not applicable to ReScript, add include = false below its description. E.g.
```

```toml
[7ee45d52-5d35-4fbd-b6f1-5c8cd8a67f18]
description = "Seven-digit number that is not an Armstrong number"

[5ee2fdf8-334e-4a46-bb8d-e5c19c02c148]
description = "Armstrong number containing seven zeroes"
include = false

[12ffbf10-307a-434e-b4ad-c925680e1dd4]
description = "The largest and last Armstrong number"
include = false
```

- **Configure the test template:** Edit `test_templates/<ExerciseName>_template.res`. Delete and uncomment the code where indicated. Use previous templates as examples of how to achieve what you need. Common comparator functions are found in `test_generator/Assertions.res`

> - **Generate and run tests:** To build the test file and run it, run `make test EXERCISE=<exercise-slug>`. Your generated test cases are found in `exercises/<exercise-slug>/tests/<ExerciseName>_test.res`. Verify that the test cases accept and return the correct data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Generate and run tests:** To build the test file and run it, run `make test EXERCISE=<exercise-slug>`. Your generated test cases are found in `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/tests/<ExerciseName>_test.res`. Verify that the test cases accept and return the correct data.
```

> - **Creating new comparator functions:** If none of the comparator functions satisfy the exercise's test requirements, you can write a new one in `test_generator/Assertions.res` and `test_generator/AssersionGenerators.res`, following the guidelines at https://bloodyowl.github.io/rescript-test/assertions. The function should be returned as a string, so that our templating system can inject the code into the generated tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Creating new comparator functions:** If none of the comparator functions satisfy the exercise's test requirements, you can write a new one in `test_generator/Assertions.res` and `test_generator/AssertionGenerators.res`, following the guidelines at https://bloodyowl.github.io/rescript-test/assertions. The function should be returned as a string, so that our templating system can inject the code into the generated tests.
```

### Updating an existing exercise

When syncing with upstream changes or fixing bugs:

- **Update an exercise:** Modify the exercise files within the `.meta/` folder to reflect changes to the exercise, such as ignored tests or signature changes.

- **Sync interface files:** If the function signature changes, ensure both the stub interface at `src/_.resi` and the example interface at `.meta/_.resi` are updated to match.

- **Verify integrity:** Run the full test suite to ensure no regressions with `make test`.

### Running tests

- Run a single exercise's tests:

```shell
make test EXERCISE=<exercise-slug>
```

- Run all exercise's tests:

```shell
make test
```

This command will iterate over all exercises and check to see if their example implementation passes all the tests.

- It is worth running the below commands to test if the code will likely pass CI checks for test cases:

> ````shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

bin/add-practice-exercise -a foobar -d 3 <exercise-slug>
````

Now complete the following steps:

- `config.json` - ensure that the new exercise data is correctly placed in order of difficulty and then alphabetically within that difficulty rating.
- implement exercise test cases, detailed in the [testing](#testing) section below.
- `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/<exercise-name>.res` - write an example of code here that will pass all test cases. This does not need to be the finest example of how to complete this exercise, but it must pass all the test cases. Update the interface file with the exposed function signatures in the `.resi` file.
- `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/src/<exercise-name>.res` - create an exercise stub here which returns `panic("'<function-name>' has not been implemented")`. Update the interface file with the function signatures, so that the student has a reference to what names and types are used.

## Testing

Tests are written using [rescript-test](https://bloodyowl.github.io/rescript-test/). There is a test templating system in place to reduce the amount of work needed by a developer. Follow these steps when writing tests:

> - `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/tests.toml` - if any of these test cases are not relevant to the language, add `ignore = true` on a newline below the description

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/tests.toml` - if any of these test cases are not relevant to the language, add `ignore = false` on a newline below the description
```

- `exercises/practice/<exercise-slug>/.meta/testTemplate.js` - edit this file to allow the test generator to automatically create test files.
  - you must write your comparator functions - https://bloodyowl.github.io/rescript-test/assertions.

>   - common assertions with comparator functions are located at `test_generator/assertions.js`. Pass the required ones into the `assertionFunctions` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - common assertions with comparator functions are located at `test_generator/assertions.js`. Add the ones you'd like to use to the `assertionFunctions` array.
```

  - edit the `template` function so that it will generate the test cases. The `c` variable refers to a test case in `problem-specifications/exercises/<exercise-slug>/canonical-data.json`. Look at other exercise test templates for inspiration.

Run a single exercise's tests:

```shell
make test EXERCISE=<exercise-slug>
```

> Run all exercise's tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run all exercises' tests:
```

To test that the example solution will pass the test suite, run:

````shell
./bin/verify-exercises

# test a single exercise:
./bin/verify-exercises <exercise-slug>
``` -->

<!-- ### Using Docker

If your track has a working [test runner](https://exercism.org/docs/building/tooling/test-runners), the `./bin/verify-exercises-in-docker` script can also be used to test all exercises.
This script pulls (_downloads_) the test runner's [Docker image](https://exercism.org/docs/building/tooling/test-runners/docker) and then uses Docker to run that image to test an exercise.

```exercism/note
The main benefit of this approach is that it best mimics how exercises are tested in production (on the website).
Another benefit is that you don't have to install track-specific dependencies (e.g. an SDK) locally, you just need Docker installed.
````

To test a single exercise, run `./bin/verify-exercises-in-docker <exercise-slug>`. -->

## Linting & Formatting

[`configlet`](https://exercism.org/docs/building/configlet) is an Exercism-wide tool for working with tracks. You can download it by running:

```shell
./bin/fetch-configlet
```

> Run the [`lint` command][configlet-link-link] to verify if exercises have the required files and if config files are correct. Address any issues before pushing your changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the [`lint` command][configlet-lint-link] to verify if exercises have the required files and if config files are correct. Address any issues before pushing your changes:
```

```shell
./bin/configlet lint
```

> Run the [`fmt` command][configlet-fmt-link] to verify if exercises and configuration files are formatted correctly. Address any issues before pushing your changes:

Reviewer: `configlet fmt` works specifically on config.json files, nothing else.

```shell
./bin/configlet fmt

# check a single exercise
./bin/configlet fmt -e <exercise-slug>

> # auto format files

Reviewer: configlet fmt -u prompts you on formatting the exercise. `configlet fmt -uy` would auto-confirm the prompt so that'd be the correct invocation for auto-formatting.

./bin/configlet fmt -u
```

If you are auto formatting files, only commit the files relevant to your pull request.

> ## Pull Requests

Reviewer: I'm not sure this section adds much value unless we're providing track-specific guidance. We're currently giving the steps to something potential contributors may already know or can readily find elsewhere.

Familiarise yourself with the Exercism [documentation][exercism-pr-docs-link] on pull requests.

> Make sure your work is commited on a new branch. When you are ready to submit your changes, push your changes to your forked repository and open a pull request on the language track [repository].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure your work is committed on a new branch.
When you are ready to submit your changes, push your changes to your forked repository and open a pull request on the language track [repository].
```

When committing your changes to version control, ensure that only the files relevant to the current pull request are committed.

More details on how to create pull requests from a fork can be found [here][github-fork-pr-link].

## Feedback

> If you find this documentation is inaccurate or incomplete, or can be improved in any way, please don't hesitate to raise an [issue][issue-link] or submit a pull request.

Reviewer: We should direct contributors to the forums by default unless we're explicitly a track accepting community contributions.

Another benefit is that you don't have to install track-specific dependencies (e.g. an SDK) locally, you just need Docker installed.
```

To test a single exercise, run `./bin/verify-exercises-in-docker <exercise-slug>`. -->

## Linting & Formatting

[`configlet`](https://exercism.org/docs/building/configlet) is an Exercism-wide tool for working with tracks. You can download it by running:

```shell
./bin/fetch-configlet
```

Run the [`lint` command][configlet-link-link] to verify if exercises have the required files and if config files are correct. Address any issues before pushing your changes:

```shell
./bin/configlet lint
```

Run the [`fmt` command][configlet-fmt-link] to verify if exercises and configuration files are formatted correctly. Address any issues before pushing your changes:

```shell
./bin/configlet fmt

# check a single exercise

> ./bin/configlet -e <exercise-slug>

Reviewer: `-e` isn't a global option. I think you meant `./bin/configlet fmt -e <exercise-slug>`
